Workflow outputs (third preview) (#5909)
nextflow-io/nextflow: docs/workflow.md

}
```

### Parameters

> Parameters can be defined in the script with a default value that can be overridden from the CLI, params file, or config file. Params should only be used by the entry workflow:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Parameters can be defined in the script with a default value that can be overridden from the CLI, params file, or config file. Parameters should only be used by the entry workflow:
```

```nextflow
params.data = '/some/data/file'

workflow {
    if( params.data )
        bar(params.data)
    else
        bar(foo())
}
```

## Named workflows

A *named workflow* is a workflow that can be called by other workflows:

```nextflow
workflow my_workflow {
    foo()
    bar( foo.out.collect() )
}

workflow {
    my_workflow()
}
```

> The above example defines a workflow named `my_workflow` which can be called from another workflow as `my_workflow()`. Both `foo` and `bar` could be any other process or workflow.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The above example defines a workflow named `my_workflow` which is called from another workflow as `my_workflow()`. Both `foo` and `bar` could be any other process or workflow.
```

(workflow-output-def)=

## Workflow outputs

:::{versionadded} 24.04.0
:::

:::{versionchanged} 24.10.0

> A second preview version was introduced. Read the [migration notes](#migrating-from-first-preview) for details.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A second preview version was introduced. See the [migration notes](#migrating-from-first-preview) for details.
```

:::

:::{versionchanged} 25.04.0

> A third preview version was introduced. Read the [migration notes](#migrating-from-second-preview) for details.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A third preview version was introduced. See [Migrating from second preview](#migrating-from-second-preview) for more details.
```

outputDir = 'my-results'
```

> It defaults to `results` in the launch directory.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The default output directory is `results` in the launch directory.
```

> By default, all output files are published to this directory. Each output in the output block can define where files are published using the `path` directive. For example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default, all output files are published to the output directory. Each output in the output block can define where files are published using the `path` directive. For example:
```

    )

    publish:
    samples = ch_samples
}

output {
    samples {
        path { sample -> "fastq/${sample.id}/" }
    }
}
```

The above example will publish each channel value to a different subdirectory. In this case, each pair of FASTQ files will be published to a subdirectory based on the sample ID.

The closure can even define a different path for each individual file using the `>>` operator:

```nextflow
output {
    samples {
        path { sample ->
            sample.fastq_1 >> "fastq/${sample.id}/"
            sample.fastq_2 >> "fastq/${sample.id}/"
        }
    }
}
```

> Each `>>` specifies a *source file* and *publish target*. The source file should be a file or collection of files, and the publish target should be a directory or file name. If the publish target ends with a slash, it is treated as the directory in which source files are published. Otherwise, it is treated as the target filename of a source file. Only files that are published with the `>>` operator are saved to the output directory.

Reviewer 2: The publish target was not the output e.g. `samples` in this example? this looks to me more a "publish directory" or just "output directory"

Author: I have changed the meaning of publish target in this iteration to match the overall syntactic/semantic changes

What was previously a "publish target" like `samples` is now simply an "output" or "output declaration".

Publish target now refers to the right-hand side of a publish statement e.g. `sample.fastq_1 >> 'fastq/'`

Essentially I have moved the concept of "publish target" into the path directive.

Basically every real-world use case I've seen when talking to users requires this fine-grained level of publishing, because of how they like to organize their output directory

Reviewer 2: Not sure it still makes sense to talk about "target" in this case. May be just saying "directory" it can result more clear. Otherwise I'm OK

Author: The right-hand side can refer to a file name or directory name, that is why I call it "target" instead of "directory"

### Index files

> Each output can create an index file of the values that were published. An index file preserves the structure of channel values, including metadata, which is simpler than encoding this information with directories and file names. The index file can be CSV (`.csv`), JSON (`.json`), or YAML (`.yml`, `.yaml`). The channel values should be files, lists, or maps.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each output can create an index file of the values that were published. An index file preserves the structure of channel values, including metadata, which is simpler than encoding this information with directories and file names. The index file can be a CSV (`.csv`), JSON (`.json`), or YAML (`.yml`, `.yaml`) file. The channel values should be files, lists, or maps.
```

- By default, output files are published to the base output directory, rather than a subdirectory corresponding to the output name.

- The syntax for dynamic publish paths has changed. Instead of defining a closure that returns a closure with the `path` directive, the outer closure should use the `>>` operator to publish individual files.

- The `mapper` index directive has been removed. Use a `map` operator in the workflwo body instead.

### Migrating from first preview

The first preview of workflow publishing was introduced in 24.04. The second preview, introduced in 24.10, made the following breaking changes:

- The process `publish:` section has been removed. Channels should be published only in workflows, ideally the entry workflow.

- The `directory` output directive has been replaced with the `outputDir` config option and `-output-dir` command line option, which is `results` by default. The other directives such as `mode` have been replaced with config options under `workflow.output.*`.

  In other words, only target blocks can be specified in the output block, but target blocks can still specify directives such as `mode`.

> - Target names cannot begin or end with a slash (`/`);

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Target names cannot begin or end with a slash (`/`).
```
